---
title: Changelog
non_cognitive: true
---

> Well, this site's existed for long enough now that there must be people coming
> back and wondering "Has anything new gone up?". In an ideal world, they'd all
> be forced to read my pages over and over again until they'd got 'em memorised
> and could spot the places where I've turned a comma into a semicolon… but
> until then, I'll let people bookmark this page and visit every six months to
> see how little progress there's been.
>
> -- jbr's [changelog][jbr changelog]

All major changes on the site
=============================

{:#changelog}
- 2011/12/17: Wrote an [Antinatalism Overview][]. Covers many arguments for and against bringing life into existence. It's hopefully more approachable than the scattered philosophy material on the topic. Contrary to mainstream philosophy, I also included some common transhumanist replies to the arguments. I tried to refrain from pushing my own view too much, but I'm not treating silly arguments as respectable either.

  I've moved some stuff from the [Blog][] into proper articles. Content didn't change in case you read them already. Articles: [Why I'm Not a Vegetarian][], [Three Sides][]. 

  Also improved the site's design somewhat. Larger articles now have a table of contents and general navigation is more visible. The main column moved to the left to accomodate for the new navigation bar. To make feedback easier, I've added a link to the contact page to the navigation and added a comment box. (Web 2.0!) Generally speaking, I also accept [anonymous feedback][whatiswrongwith.me] about anything. (Yes, anything.)

  More overviews are coming. Soon-ish. If I don't get bored, that is. Basicall, the languages articles isn't happening, Great Filter was delayed until I figure out identity and probabilities, an informal introduction to Solomonoff Induction and Kolmogorov Complexity is coming, and I've begun writing an overview about New Testament scholarship.
  
- 2011/09/04: Converted whole site to [nanoc][]. Most of the content got
  re-organized, but not widely changed. A few things have disappeared, but will
  probably come back in a better form later. The design is reasonably the same,
  with some minor tweaks. The navigation bar is now at the bottom to deal with
  some footnote issues.

  Every page has an [Epistemic State][] now. This is an important step to
  convert this into proper long-term content. Sites are also dated now, so that
  some obviously out-dated material is clearly visible as such (and new material
  is obvious on the main page).
  
  I added the story [Milinda and the Minotaur][] I wrote some time ago, but
  never felt like publishing. Thanks to [epistemic states][Epistemic State]
  though, I now can.
  
  I do plan articles on the Great Filter and languages (use and learning), but
  dunno how long this'll take. For now, this is mostly a setup to make it really
  easy for me to write more stuff and release faster. I have a couple of drafts
  lying around I might revive, particularly a comparison of the [Theravada][]
  path model of enlightenment with the Matrix movie.
  
  (I also threw away the old changelog because it's useless now anyway. Check
  the [git history][Source] if you care.)
